\section{Related Work}

\paragraph{RP Debugging} REScala~\cite{salvaneschi2014rescala} is a RP
library for Scala, based on Scala.React.  Recently a debugger model was
created for REScala, called ``RP Debugging''~\cite{salvaneschi2016debugging},
featuring a dependency graph visualization, breakpoints, a query
language and performance monitoring.  The debugger fully integrates with
the Eclipse IDE and the Scala debugger facilities, creating a (Scala)
developer experience and a feature RxFiddle currently can not offer:
reactive breakpoints.  However breakpoints are arguably not as useful as
``simulated breakpoints'' (Section%
\ref{breakpoints}, \nameref{breakpoints}).  Furthermore, our debugger
design supports multiple languages, and works outside of the IDE, in the
browser environment and/or connecting to a production system.  Rx has
different reactive semantics and a more powerful, but also more
extensive API, which includes operators acting in the time domain (\code
{delay}, etc.).  Therefore, we argue that seeing the many values in a
flow over time is very valuable; RP Debugging shows the latest values at
the selected time.

\paragraph{RP Visualization} RxMarbles~\cite{rxmarbles} visualizes
single Rx operators, for the purpose of learning and comprehension.
Users can modify the diagrams by dragging the events and instantly see
the changes reflected in the output.  By using specific precoded inputs
and timings the essence of the operator is made clear.  In the soon to
be released RxViz~\cite{rxviz}, Moroshko takes a similar approach, but
uses code instead of prepared inputs.  Where RxMarbles is limited to non
higher order flows, RxViz subscribes to all inner Observables when it
detects a higher order Observable showing them concurrently.  In
contrast to our work, these tools focus only on teaching the behavior of
single operators.

\paragraph{Omniscient Debugging} Omniscient debuggers~\cite{pothier2009back}
are ``all-knowing debuggers'', that trace, store and query all events in
a program execution.  When storing vasts amount of program execution
information, performance and efficiency becomes very much a problem and
research in omniscient debuggers focus on this specifically.  We also
trace events of the entire execution, however in contrast to omniscient
debuggers we only store trace events regarding RP data flows.  The RP
semantics allow us to create future optimizations, for example retaining
only the active flow structure, while the flow's data is kept in a
rolling buffer.

\paragraph{Dynamic Analysis.} The study of program execution is called
``dynamic analysis''~\cite{cornelissen2009systematic}.  In most cases
dynamic analysis involves a \textit{post mortem} analysis, where first
the program is run, collecting an execution trace, and then the trace
data is analyzed to create a visualization.  The various derived
visualizations, like class and instance interaction graphs, function
invocation histories~\cite{lange1995program}, invocation views and
sequence diagrams~\cite{cornelissen2008execution} show the possibility
to use trace information for debugging.  Arguably an on-line analysis is
more useful for debugging than the standard post mortem analysis. Reiss,
in reference~\cite{reiss2006visualizing}, mentions the compromises that
have to be made to make an on-line analysis:  reduced tracing is
required to not slow down the system (known as the observer-effect) and
fast analysis is required to lower the cost of getting to the
visualization, to not discourage the users.  In our design, we handle
the same compromises as they are relevant for RP debugging too, and our
JavaScript trace implementation bears resemblance to that of Program
Visualiser~\cite{lange1995program}.

\paragraph{Understanding Debugging} Debugging for general purpose
languages revolves around attaching a debugger, stepping through the
code, attaching code or data breakpoints, navigating along different
calls in the call stack and examining variables and results of
expressions~\cite{Spinellis2017}.  However, existing research, measuring
how these different tasks are part of the developers work day, found
that while developers spend much time on comprehending code, they do not
spend much time inside the IDE's debugger~\cite{minelli2015know}.
Beller et al.~\cite{beller2017behavior} found that only 23\% of their
subjects actively use the IDE's debugger, with the most common action
being adding breakpoints, followed by stepping through code.  The
automated tooling of these studies did not measure different kinds of
debugging other than using the IDE provided tools, however Beller's
survey indicates that 71\% also uses \code{printf} statements for
debugging. No indication was given of any RP language and libraries used
by the subjects in the study, but the observation that \printfdebugging{}
is common, matches our experience with debugging reactive programs.

\paragraph{Debugging for Program Comprehension} Both debugging and
comprehension are processes in the work of programmers.  Initially,
comprehension was seen as a distinct step programmers had to make prior
to being able to debug programs~\cite{katz1987debugging}, but this
distinction is criticized by Gilmore, saying we must view ``debugging as
a design activity''~\cite{gilmore1991models}, part of creating and
comprehending programs.  Maalej et al.~\cite{Maalej2014} interviewed
professional developers and found that developers require runtime
information to understand a program, and that debugging is frequently
used to gather this runtime information.  This supports our view that
debugging is not only used for fault localization, but also for
comprehension.
